# Add a New Element to a Binary Search Tree

[FCC link](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/coding-interview-prep/data-structures/add-a-new-element-to-a-binary-search-tree)

This series of challenges will introduce the tree data structure. Trees are an
important and versatile data structure in computer science. Of course, their
name comes from the fact that when visualized they look much like the trees we
are familiar with in the natural world. A tree data structure begins with one
node, typically referred to as the root, and from here branches out to
additional nodes, each of which may have more child nodes, and so on and so
forth. The data structure is usually visualized with the root node at the top;
you can think of it as a natural tree flipped upside down.

First, let's describe some common terminology we will encounter with trees. The
root node is the top of the tree. Data points in the tree are called nodes.
Nodes with branches leading to other nodes are referred to as the parent of the
node the branch leads to (the child). Other more complicated familial terms
apply as you might expect. A subtree refers to all the descendants of a
particular node, branches may be referred to as edges, and leaf nodes are nodes
at the end of the tree that have no children. Finally, note that trees are
inherently recursive data structures. That is, any children of a node are
parents of their own subtree, and so on. The recursive nature of trees is
important to understand when designing algorithms for common tree operations.

To begin, we will discuss a particular type of a tree, the binary tree. In fact,
we will actually discuss a particular binary tree, a binary search tree. Let's
describe what this means. While the tree data structure can have any number of
branches at a single node, a binary tree can only have two branches for every
node. Furthermore, a binary search tree is ordered with respect to the child
subtrees, such that the value of each node in the left subtree is less than or
equal to the value of the parent node, and the value of each node in the right
subtree is greater than or equal to the value of the parent node. It's very
helpful to visualize this relationship in order to understand it better:

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18563015/32136009-1e665d98-bbd6-11e7-9133-63184f9f9182.png)

Now this ordered relationship is very easy to see. Note that every value to the
left of 8, the root node, is less than 8, and every value to the right is
greater than 8. Also notice that this relationship applies to each of the
subtrees as well. For example, the first left child is a subtree. 3 is the
parent node, and it has exactly two child nodes â€” by the rules governing binary
search trees, we know without even looking that the left child of this node (and
any of its children) will be less than 3, and the right child (and any of its
children) will be greater than 3 (but also less than the structure's root
value), and so on.

Binary search trees are very common and useful data structures because they
provide logarithmic time in the average case for several common operations such
as lookup, insertion, and deletion.
